Hello. Let's take a look at Meadow, a scattering toolkit I've put together for Houdini. To be clear, this isn't a total
replacement for your existing workflows. The goal here was to create a set of nodes that seamlessly integrate into
Houdini. You can drop them into your current setups to get an extra layer of control without having to change your
entire graph as they behave just like the existing nodes. In this video, we're going to walk through the different
nodes in the kit. You can chat to the timestamps for each node as well. And
check out the description for how to install these nodes yourself. For our demo, we're going to use
different grounds or surfaces to scatter our object on. And as objects, I
actually prepared three components here. Let's take a look at those.
They are just a sphere, a pyramid, and a cube that I placed in the stage
underneath an assets scope or an assets group. This
uh works on the stage with a lop point instance here, but it's also going to work in subs since all the points are
actually going to be manipulated on a sub level anyway. So, to get started,
let's take a look at our first ground here. Um, like this. Uh we're just going
to dive into this instance here. So at the top I am going to import the
uh the input into our current node and then unpack it so that we have some
geometry to work with. I'm also importing and unpacking only to the
component level so that we get the names cube, pyramid and sphere. Um, and that
just allows us to preview our instancing inside the the instancer. You
can also have multiple uh scene views with uh one locked to the stage and then
preview it that way. But this uh is often pretty easy to just have a a copy
to points uh in the same scene that you can use to preview. So, it's going to
look something like this with uh the the grid. Right now,
Scatter
let's start out with the meadow scatter node. Now, this node, if we take a look
at it, is going to be very similar to a normal scatter node. And I'll go into
the differences in a second here, but really it is just a node that allows us
to project uh UVs onto the surface. Uh so it is set to in texture space by
default and it allows us to display the projection plane. So the first thing I'm
going to do is I'm going to scale up my uh projection plane and then uh we can
adjust our density. And we have a uh
points scattered on the surface in UV space. This allows us to move this
projection plane around by just going to the edit mode of the node
like this. Um and why is this helpful? Well, it is helpful because let me um
preview a normal scatter node really quick. So with the normal scatter node, we would do exactly the same thing, but
we'll just scatter on the surface directly. So if I then go into our scene
here, uh we'll take a look at our output. We're now instancing a bunch of
cubes onto our surface. If I add this log onto our surface here, you can see
we now have a log on our surface with cubes scattered on it. But as soon as I
change it, everything changes. And the reason why is just because the randomness gets
reset. So if we use a our normal scatter node with UV projection,
we have this. And then if I bring in the law, we automatically get the same kind
of like scattering because the scattering happen or the points don't jump around because they are projected
in UV space. And we're also getting a uh top- down projection. So we won't have
anything on multiple surfaces if you have intersecting grounds for example.
Now, like I said in the beginning, these two nodes exact act exactly the same. So
whether you want to use a scatter node, a meta scatter node, or a scatter and align node, it really doesn't matter.
This just plugs plugs in exactly like any of these other nodes here.
Now the uh other thing with the scatter node
is it can you can also rotate this projection plane. So, if you would like
to project this from a different I actually have to look at it. If I actually would like to project this from
a different angle, uh this could come in uh handy. For example, when you're
working with a hill and this hill might be slanted and you you would like to
project something kind of like against this hill, you would want to probably change that projection plane so you're
not getting um so you're getting a good coverage of that.
And the all the other all the other settings here are exactly the same as on
the scatter node. The only thing to mention is maybe these um point attributes, vertx attributes, these are
getting copied from the projection. So if you have any attributes on here,
they're getting automatically copied uh because of this from the surface onto
the points. So this is useful for any kind of attributes you would like to copy onto the points.
Cluster
All right, our next node is going to be the meadow cluster node. So, this is used to add clustering to our points. To
visualize that a little bit better, I'm going to increase our point count in the scatter. And let's take a look at the
cluster. The first thing I would do is just click this visualize, which gives us a nice visualization of what's
happening. If we zoom out a little bit, we'll start seeing a noise pattern. I'm going to scale this noise pattern up so
we can see something. And you'll see a uh cluster pattern of different uh for
different objects that you're going to scatter. Now, this isn't like a voronoi pattern, but it's a like more natural
pearlin pattern. And uh we can add a uh another uh probability in here. And if
this is hard to see, you can always play around with the colors, whatever uh works best for you.
And once uh we have all our probabilities, let's say we want uh only
very few of the third probability, this like cyan color, or maybe we want fewer
of the blue. Uh it allows us to adjust these probabilities. So we get nice
little clusters of of these blue um objects. Where this might come in handy
is if you have a field of flowers and you want like clusters of blue flowers
and otherwise like yellow and then green flowers and having them kind of like you know in the same area. Uh that's where
this node is really handy. I'm going to increase this back up so we
have an even distribution again. And then we can play around with the roughness slider. This is just a
roughness of the pearland noise pattern. So we get these really interesting
shapes here. I'm just going to add a little bit of roughness. And then we
have this blur where we can kind of like blur the borders of the
of these shapes here a little bit. So maybe we have some plants that kind of
like um some seeds of the plants that kind of like went a little bit further in this thing. Now this is setting the
index attribute. So if you hover over it, we can see the index attribute and we can use that then uh to drive our
copy to points or our instancer. So, if we go back outside to our instancer now,
we can see we have some spheres, we have some uh cubes, and then we going to have
some uh I guess these are the pyramids, and then these are the cubes. So, we're
getting these nice uh clusters.
Now in the case that we have uh specific assets that we want to put onto the onto
these index indices, we can either kind of like control a name attribute per
index or we can also set this attribute type to string and this uh gives us yeah
a new um a a new field here. So we can enter cube
sphere pyramid and if we switch this attribute
to name now in our copy to points for example we can set this piece attribute
to name and if this this will correspond with our name here and it will also work
with our point instancer and we're going to get we can kind of like control which one is going to be which if we want to
control uh the probability of the cube, the probability of the sphere etc. Uh on
the instancer here we just would have to set this to name attribute uh to name
and well it would work the same way uh like that.
Prune
Okay. So our next node is going to be the meadow prune node. Now what the
prune node does it prunes based on a attribute. Now we don't have a an
attribute. So let's just use a normal attribute paint like this.
And we can just uh use this. It's already set to mask. So now we can just
kind of like draw here like this. We can draw some areas that we want to paint.
uh some areas that we want some flowers to spawn
like this. All right.
And you can use any kind of um nodes that create these attributes. We're
going to learn obviously about all the mask attributes from the meadow pack, but it also works with attribute paint
and with other nodes as well. this um since we have our scatter set to uh
import attributes from for all point attributes, this mask attribute comes
through. And if you want to preview this mask attribute, you can uh come in here
to this marker tab and just uh display it. And if you don't have this, let's say you it will look like this, you can
come in here and add a color. And we'll set this to vis mask uh mask. And we'll
go to um ramped attribute. And we want to display
the mask attribute. And I'm just going to set this to infrared. So we got a blue to red color. So now we will always
see this mask attribute which kind of helps especially when we have we're visualizing the color attribute here.
Right? So if I want to just see the mask, I I come to this visualization tab. So now that we have our mask, we
can put our prune node in and we're automatically pruning everything that is
um uh black and everything that is white stays. Now we have different methods
here. So we have random, noise and threshold. A threshold simply cuts out
everything that is below the threshold. So everything that is below 0.1 but that
gives us a very straight kind of like edge that might be good for some sometimes or other times you might want
like a random kind of like uh edge. In some cases you might want to set this to
noise and this is going to use a positionbased noise. So if we scale this
up you can kind of actually see this uh noise. The reason why we might sometimes
want to use a noise and the reason why it's very small is so it acts kind of like random is in case uh these points
move around. If they just move a tiny bit around the scattering changes and
then the look changes a lot. So if I come to my scatter here and I move my
scattering around. Oh, sorry. Um, I'm actually going to not go into
the edit mode so we can keep uh keep it and just move it around a little bit.
See here how it barely changes in the noise. But if I set this to random and I
move it uh over just a little bit, we're getting a completely different result.
So sometimes it might be nice to kind of like control the randomness with a
noise. And this is going to be used in other areas um in other nodes as well later. So this is kind of like a nice um
option for if you if it's important to preserve the the position of the point
so uh the points don't jump around every time you change something.
Point Transform
Okay, now that we have our points, uh let's uh align them to the surface
because right now they're all kind of like the pyramid is pointing into weird direction and it doesn't really behave
the way we would want to. Normally, you would use a scatter and align node probably to align your uh points to a
surface, but we're going to use our meadow point transform node. Now what
this note does, it has a uh initialized direction node here. And this direction
is really just kind of like a direction that makes it so all the nodes here point uh into the direction of the
normal from the surface that the points got spawned onto.
Now, uh, if we have a forest, we wouldn't want, if this is a hill, we
wouldn't want the trees to all look away from the surface. So, in this case, we have this direction slider. And we can
actually slide it up all the way to one. And now they will all follow this up
vector. So, the direction is really kind of like a blend between the normal and the up vector. If we want, we can go
negative and they will point down. But usually, we want to stay between uh zero
and one. Now, we also have this translation, rotation, and scale um sections, and
these are really just here to randomize some of our data. So, let's say we want
to rotate each um each object here. um give a completely randomized rotation in
Y or in up we can just add 360. So we get uh a random value between zero and
360. We can also if we would want to snap it
to 45° angles set this to 45 and now all our objects here um would get like
snapped into 45 degree angles. This is helpful for more architectural kind of
scattering. Then the scale. Let's adjust the scale so everything kind of like looks a
little bit okay. Better. Um, that works better. And then we can uh scale some of
our uh stuff. I would like some of our objects to be uh really big. So, I want
to kind of like randomize it, but keep the X, Y, and Z locked together so that
I'm I can only uh so that they all scale evenly. Um, if I want to only grow them
into Y, I could set this to XZ locked and I could move this guy here and it
would only randomize this. And if I randomize this, it will uh grow evenly
into uh both um X and Z direction. But for now, let me switch this to XYZ and
just scale some objects really big. Now, it would be cool to have only few
objects that are really big. So, that's where we can use this ramp slider. And I'm going to just expand that. Set this
to be spline and add another curve in here. And so now we should have, if I
bring this over, we're going to have like some objects that are really big, but most of them
are going to be one. And then every like every between 5% or so, I have a chance
of scaling all the way up to four. So that's what this probability curve here is for. It allows us to kind of create
some very big objects. um but most of them being like at scale of one. All
right, this kind of covers some of the the basic things. Um now let's go into some
of the more advanced uh uh things of this node. Our next node is going to be
Frustum Cull
the frostm call. I set up a little uh forest scene here uh where each one of
these uh pyramids might be a scattered object. And we have a camera and this
camera has some animation on it. It's all the way over here. So if you look at our camera, we're just flying through
this area here. Um that's it. We just have a little bit of an animation. So
what we can do with the frostm call uh if I just place this frostm call I set
the instancer to I put a star behind both so it captures all of them but
really I just want one camera and whatever the instances are that I want
but put this down here um we're getting a frostome column and this works um just
like that where we call everything that is not visible in some really heavy
scenes this might make sense uh for render time. Um most of the times though
the point instances are are good enough like optimized enough that that that
this is not a problem but in case you want it um there is a frostm call. This
works on the lot and there is also a uh another node in for the substage where
you can also do a frostm call for this where you point to a up camera um or
sorry a sub camera. Uh there is some padding in case you
want to increase the area around um the if you want to give some extra space.
You can move the camera back to capture anything behind the camera. And there is
a distance fall off in case you would like to um limit uh the the the elements
into the distance. And if you if these are not exactly the same number, um it
will randomly kind of like uh fade fade them out over that distance.
Mask Builder
Okay, so next up, let's take a look at some of the mask nodes that we have. The
first one is going to be the meadow mask builder. And this node here really is
just kind of a preset uh a note to to to run some preset noises. uh onto your uh
surfaces or points. So again, I have my mask visualizer on and let's scale this
uh node up because we have working with a quite a large scale here. So this is
just a way to kind of like have some of these no noise presets. We can switch
between uh different presets here. And I just made some of these um uh presets
that are just combinations of different noises. So if we expand this, we can clear it and make our own own noise
here. We can start with a pear and noise. Um play around with, you know,
what this should look like. And maybe make some little islands like this. And
then we can add other noises on top of it and set them to multiply. for example,
we'll use an alligator noise. And I just want some of these really kind of like
these these um these lines here. And so I want it to be mostly
mostly um white with some black lines around here. And so now we can kind of
like multiply, add, subtract, just kind of play around with different noise setups, but mostly I think um I'll just
be using these uh presets uh that come with the node to to have some variations
for for noises um to scatter plants or or leaves or whatever.
Uh the way uh to see what this looks like is we can take a look at this
example here where I scattered some points on on this surface. Let me hide
this surface. And then I built uh I built I used a mask builder uh
pruned some stuff and then what this looks like in the end is we just have um
some of these patterns here, these spheres. You can see the noise patterns. We're just getting some randomized
patterns on here. Makes it really easy to just drop this mask builder anywhere into your graph.
Mask by Curve
Okay, next up is going to be the meadow mask by curve feature or note. Uh let's
take a look at this. And what we need for this is obviously a curve. So I have my surface here and I'm going to uh I
already prepared this these curve shapes here. So, we can just take a look at this uh with these curves here. And I I
I drew these bezier curves. Um the reason why I have a reample node here is
because if I plug them in, we're going to get a warning here and that says this node performs a lot faster if the curves
are polygons. Consider resampling curves. So, the node itself is just works faster if it uh it can work on
polygons. that makes a difference when you're in the if you have like a hundreds of thousands of points. Uh for
for small areas like this, it shouldn't matter too much. Now, this node will
work on uh surfaces like this or you can obviously also do this directly on
scattered points if you rather want to just kind of like work with uh the final
resolution uh of your um of your points. to work to for to to use this. I'm just
going to use the surface because it's a little bit easier to visualize. So, we're going to have a radius that allows
us to add a little bit of a fall-off. And then we can offset this radius if I
preview these curves. I can have them the fall-off start on the inside or I
can have the fall-off oops, sorry. I can have the fall-off start on the outside.
Um, that's what this one is for. We can also uh say that we want to force the
curves to be open and add a little bit of thickness to our curves. And then if
I add I would have to I guess have the falloff be on the outside of this. Um,
and then I can have kind of like thicker ones or less thick ones. But for this in this case I prefer these kind of uh this
kind of look where we have maybe some forests on these hills here. Now I'm
just going to add another mask by curve node here. And in this this time my
curve looks like this. Maybe it's a road going through this valley here. And I'm
going to add some thickness to my road. But then I'm going to set it to exclude.
And I'll add a little bit of a radius again. Just a little bit of a fall-off. Just like that. We can also show our
curves here if we want to to see what's going on. And that's pretty much all
there is to it. Uh there's also a ramp if we want to remap this uh curve.
Mask by Geometry
Okay. For our next uh node, the mask by geometry node. Let's just start with a
simple setup here. We're going to have uh a surface that is like a hill and
we're going to scatter some points on it. And then I'm going to just copy to points some of these trees. Now next
let's have some uh ferns for example or other plants and
we want to scatter them around our trees. We can just use a mask by
geometry node here just like this. And this will mask the areas around the
objects that we then can use. If I preview this to kind of like scatter
some objects around these uh trees. Uh this works whether uh these objects are
uh coming from USD or you can unpack them or um whether they come from a copy
to point like this. Now you might wonder why not just use a
mask from geometry node just like this because it should work exactly the same.
Um, we should get if I just set the radius a little bit bigger, we should really kind of get the same result
between these two. Well, yes. Um, and that is kind of like why I built all of
these nodes as drop in replacements. I found that this node is just working a little bit faster or when you have
hundreds of thousands of points. But if you want, you can just use this mask
from geometry node. Um, they're exactly doing the same. So we also have a
distance inside uh if we want to look at the the distance inside uh the surface.
So that doesn't work or distance from the surface uh like this where we can
kind of like create little rings. Now in case you would like to have a uh radius
and not have anything inside, we can use a ramp. Just move this point a tiny bit
over. And then add another point in here. And I'm gonna set that at zero. And then
this one I can just put at 0.01. And now we won't have any objects inside
the tree. So we can kind of use the ramp as well. We can always use this exclude to subtract um these areas from an
existing map and show the geometry if we need to preview what we're doing.
Mask by Feature
Okay, let's take a look at the next node, the mask by feature node.
We'll simply plug it in. And for this node, it might be good to actually set our mask attribute uh to
using min and max zero to one. Otherwise, um it will look kind of
weird. I forgot to set this earlier. So, I'm adjusting it now and letting you guys know. Otherwise, it automatically
adjusts to the minimum and maximum values. Let's take a look at this. Um, by
default, the slope is activated and we can kind of compute a range here or we
can use the ramp. I mean, we can also use them in combination. But this allows us to kind of like mask out sloped
areas. Now, you're uh you're definitely right. You can use a mask by feature
node like this and where you can use this direction, shadows, ambient occlusion. All of these nodes here are
just drop in replacements for the other nodes. So uh play around, feel free to
use either or node. The I just put the two um attributes that I like using a
lot. Uh so the other one is the altitude which we can multiply here with the uh
existing one and we can again compute the range so that we can then kind of
like dial in our our ramp perfectly to mask out only higher areas. That is
pretty much everything. As always there is going to be up attributes and altitude attributes. We can again take a
look on our planet how this comes in handy. Uh if we have our altitude
calculated as a distance away from the center, this allows us to uh set these
this altitude attribute um based on the on the center. Meaning
it works also on custom shapes like uh this and obviously for the slope as
well. All right, those were all the notes that we have so far in the meadow scattering
Outro
uh toolkit. Uh feel free uh to leave a message down
below or um create an issue on GitHub if you run into any issues. That link is
below where you can also find the installation instructions for those nodes.
